Tarantool 1.10.8
================

Releases: https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/releases

Date: 2020-10-22 Tag: 1.10.8-1-ge69e130

Overview
--------

1.10.8 is the next stable release of the 1.10.x series. The label
“stable” means there are 1.10.x-based applications running in production
for quite a while without known crashes, incorrect results or other
showstopper bugs.

This release resolves roughly 7 issues since the 1.10.7 version. There
may be bugs in less common areas. If you find any, feel free to report
an issue at `GitHub <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues>`_.

Compatibility
-------------

Tarantool 1.10.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.9.x in binary
data layout, client-server protocol and replication protocol. Please
upgrade using the box.schema.upgrade() procedure to unlock all the new
features of the 1.10.x series.

Functionality added or changed
------------------------------

Module API
~~~~~~~~~~

-   Exposed the box region, key_def and several other functions in order
    to implement external tuple.keydef and tuple.merger modules on top of
    them (:tarantool-issue:`5273`, :tarantool-issue:`5384`).

Bugs fixed
----------

Core
~~~~

-   Fixed fibers switch-over to prevent JIT machinery misbehavior. Trace
    recording is aborted when fiber yields the execution. The yield
    occurring while the compiled code is being run (it’s likely a
    function with a yield underneath called via LuaJIT FFI) leads to the
    platform panic (:tarantool-issue:`1700`, :tarantool-issue:`4491`).
-   Fixed fibers switch-over to prevent implicit GC disabling. The yield
    occurring while user-defined \__gc metamethod is running leads to the
    platform panic.

Lua
~~~

-   Fixed unhandled Lua error that might lead to memory leaks and
    inconsistencies in ``<space_object>:frommap()``,
    ``<key_def_object>:compare()``, ``<merge_source>:select()``
    (:tarantool-issue:`5382`).

LuaJIT
~~~~~~

-   Fixed the error occurring on loading luajit-gdb.py with Python2
    (:tarantool-issue:`4828`).

Misc
~~~~

-   Fixed potential lag on boot up procedure when system’s password
    database is slow in access (:tarantool-issue:`5034`).

..  _module-api-1:

Module API
~~~~~~~~~~

-   Get rid of typedef redefinitions for compatibility with C99
    (:tarantool-issue:`5313`).
