Tarantool 1.10.7
================

Date: 2019-07-17 Tag: 1.10.7-1-gb93a33a

Overview
--------

1.10.7 is the next stable release of the 1.10.x series. The label
“stable” means there are 1.10.x-based applications running in production
for quite a while without known crashes, incorrect results or other
showstopper bugs.

This release resolves roughly 14 issues since 1.10.6. There may be bugs
in less common areas. If you find any, feel free to report an issue at
`GitHub <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues>`__.

Compatibility
-------------

Tarantool 1.10.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.9.x in binary
data layout, client-server protocol and replication protocol. Please
upgrade using the box.schema.upgrade() procedure to unlock all the new
features of the 1.10.x series.

Bugs fixed
----------

Core
~~~~

-   Fixed a bug in C module reloading (gh-4945).
-   Fixed races and corner cases in box (re)configuration (gh-4231).
-   Fixed check of index field map size which led to crash (gh-5084).
-   Fixed wrong mpsgpack extension type in an error message at decoding
    (gh-5017).

Lua
~~~

-   Fixed error while closing socket.tcp_server socket (gh-4087).

LuaRocks
~~~~~~~~

-   Don’t ruin rock name when freshly installing \*.all.rock with
    dependencies (gh-4704).

Vinyl
~~~~~

-   Fixed crash during compaction due to tuples with size exceeding
    vinyl_max_tuple_size setting (gh-4864).
-   Fixed crash during recovery of vinyl index due to the lack of file
    descriptors (gh-4805).
-   Fixed crash during executing upsert changing primary key in debug
    mode (gh-5005).
-   Fixed crash due to triggered dump process during secondary index
    creation (gh-5042).
-   Fixed crash/deadlock (depending on build type) during dump process
    scheduling and concurrent DDL operation (gh-4821).
-   Fixed crash during read of prepared but still not yet not committed
    statement (gh-3395).
-   Fixed squashing set and arithmetic upsert operations (gh-5106).
-   Create missing folders for vinyl spaces and indexes if needed to
    avoid confusing fails of tarantool started from backup (gh-5090).
-   Fixed crash during squash of many (more than 4000) upserts modifying
    the same key (gh-4957).
