--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tarantool 1.10
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whats_new_110:

.. _whats_new_1104:

**Release 1.10.4**

Release type: stable (lts). Release date: 2019-09-26.  Tag: 1-10-4.

Announcement: https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/releases/tag/1.10.4.

Overview

1.10.4 is the next :ref:`stable (lts) <release-policy>` release in the 1.10 series.
The label 'stable' means we have had systems running in production without known crashes,
bad results or other showstopper bugs for quite a while now.

This release resolves about 50 issues since 1.10.3.

Compatibility

Tarantool 1.10.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.9.x in binary data layout,
client-server protocol and replication protocol.
Please :ref:`upgrade <admin-upgrades>` using the ``box.schema.upgrade()``
procedure to unlock all the new features of the 1.10.x series when migrating
from 1.9 version.

Functionality added or changed

* (Engines) Improve dump start/stop logging. When initiating memory dump, print
  how much memory is going to be dumped, expected dump rate, ETA, and the recent
  write rate. Upon dump completion, print observed dump rate in addition to dump
  size and duration.
* (Engines) Look up key in reader thread. If a key isn't found in the tuple cache,
  we fetch it from a run file. In this case disk read and page decompression is
  done by a reader thread, however key lookup in the fetched page is still
  performed by the TX thread. Since pages are immutable, this could as well
  be done by the reader thread, which would allow us to save some precious CPU
  cycles for TX.
  Issue `4257 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4257>`_.
* (Core) Improve :ref:`box.stat.net <box_introspection-box_stat>`.
  Issue `4150 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4150>`_.
* (Core) Add ``idle`` to downstream status in ``box.info``.
  When a relay sends a row it updates ``last_row_time`` value with the
  current time. When ``box.info()`` is called, ``idle`` is set to
  ``current_time`` - ``last_row_time``.
* (Replication) Print corrupted rows on decoding error.
  Improve row printing to log. Print the header row by row, 16 bytes in a row,
  and format output to match ``xxd`` output:

  .. code-block:: bash

      [001] 2019-04-05 18:22:46.679 [11859] iproto V> Got a corrupted row:
      [001] 2019-04-05 18:22:46.679 [11859] iproto V> 00000000: A3 02 D6 5A E4 D9 E7 68 A1 53 8D 53 60 5F 20 3F
      [001] 2019-04-05 18:22:46.679 [11859] iproto V> 00000010: D8 E2 D6 E2 A3 02 D6 5A E4 D9 E7 68 A1 53 8D 53

* (Lua) Add type of operation to space :ref:`trigger parameters <box_space-on_replace>`.
  For example, a trigger function may now look like this:

  .. code-block:: lua

      function before_replace_trig(old, new, space_name, op_type)
          if op_type == 'INSERT' then
              return old
          else
              return new
          end
      end

  Issue `4099 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4099>`_.
* (Lua) Add ``debug.sourcefile()`` and ``debug.sourcedir()`` helpers
  (and ``debug.__file__`` and ``debug.__dir__ shortcuts``) to determine
  the location of a current Lua source file.
  Part of issue `4193 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4193>`_.
* (HTTP client) Add ``max_total_connections`` option in addition to
  ``max_connections`` to allow more fine-grained tuning of ``libcurl``
  connection cache. Don't restrict the total connections` with a constant value
  by default, but use ``libcurl``'s default, which scales the threshold according
  to easy handles count.
  Issue `3945 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3945>`_.

Bugs fixed

* (Vinyl) Fix assertion failure in `vy_tx_handle_deferred_delete`.
  Issue `4294 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4294>`_.
* (Vinyl) Don't purge deleted runs from vylog on compaction.
  Cherry-picked from issue `4218 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4218>`_.
* (Vinyl) Don't throttle DDL.
  Issue `4238 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4238>`_.
* (Vinyl) Fix deferred DELETE statement lost on commit.
  Issue `4248 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4248>`_.
* (Vinyl) Fix assertion while recovering dumped statement.
  Issue `4222 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4222>`_.
* (Vinyl) Reset dump watermark after updating memory limit.
  Issue `3864 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3864>`_.
* (Vinyl) Be pessimistic about write rate when setting dump watermark.
  Issue `4166 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4166>`_.
* (Vinyl) Fix crash if space is dropped while space.get is reading from it.
  Issue `4109 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4109>`_.
* (Vinyl) Fix crash during index build.
  Issue `4152 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4152>`_.
* (Vinyl) Don't compress L1 runs.
  Issue `2389 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/2389>`_.
* (Vinyl) Account statements skipped on read.
* (Vinyl) Take into account primary key lookup in latency accounting.
* (Vinyl) Fix ``vy_range_update_compaction_priority`` hang.
* (Vinyl) Free region on vylog commit instead of resetting it and clean up
  region after allocating surrogate statement.
* (Vinyl) Increase even more the open file limit in ``systemd`` unit file.
* (Vinyl) Increment min range size to 128MB
* (Memtx) Cancel checkpoint thread at exit.
  Issue `4170 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4170>`_.
* (Core) Fix crash for update with empty tuple.
  Issue `4041 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4041>`_.
* (Core) Fix use-after-free in ``space_truncate``.
  Issue `4093 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4093>`_.
* (Core) Fix error while altering index with sequence.
  Issue `4214 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4214>`_.
* (Core) Detect a new invalid json path case.
  Issue `4419 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4419>`_.
* (Core) Fix empty password authentication.
  Issue `4327 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4327>`_.
* (Core) Fix ``txn::sub_stmt_begin`` array size.
* (Core) Account ``index.pairs`` in ``box.stat.SELECT()``.
* (Replication) Disallow bootstrap of read-only masters.
  Issue `4321 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4321>`_.
* (Replication) Enter orphan mode on manual replication configuration change.
  Issue `4424 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4424>`_.
* (Replication) Set ``last_row_time`` to ``now`` in ``relay_new`` and ``relay_start``.
  PR `4431 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/pull/4431>`_.
* (Replication) Stop relay on subscribe error.
  Issue `4399 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4399>`_.
* (Replication) Init ``coio`` watcher before join/subscribe.
  Issue `4110 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4110>`_.
* (Replication) Allow to change instance id during join.
  Issue `4107 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4107>`_.
* (Replication) Fix garbage collection logic.
* (Replication) Revert packet boundary checking for iproto.
* (Replication) Do not abort replication on ER_UNKNOWN_REPLICA.
* (Replication) Reduce effects of input buffer fragmentation on large ``cfg.readahead``.
* (Replication) Fix upgrade from 1.7 (it doesn't recognize IPROTO_VOTE request type).
* (Replication) Fix memory leak in call / eval in the case when a transaction
  is not committed.
  Issue `4388 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4388>`_.
* (Lua) Fix ``fio.mktree()`` error reporting.
  Issue `4044 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4044>`_.
* (Lua) Fix segfault on ``ffi.C_say()`` without filename.
  Issue `4336 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4336>`_.
* (Lua) Fix segfault on ``json.encode()`` on a recursive table.
  Issue `4366 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4366>`_.
* (Lua) Fix ``pwd.getpwall()`` and ``pwd.getgrall()`` hang on CentOS 6
  and FreeBSD 12.
  Issues `4447 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4447>`_,
  `4428 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4428>`_.
* (Lua) Fix a segfault during initialization of a cipher from ``crypto`` module.
  Issue `4223 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4223>`_.
* (HTTP client) Reduce stack consumption during waiting for a DNS resolving result.
  Issue `4179 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4179>`_.
* (HTTP client) Increase max outgoing header size to 8 KiB.
  Issue `3959 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3959>`_.
* (HTTP client) Verify "headers" option stronger.
  Issues `4281 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4281>`_,
  `3679 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3679>`_.
* (HTTP client) Use bundled ``libcurl`` rather than system-wide by default.
  Issues `4318 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4318>`_,
  `4180 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4180>`_,
  `4288 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4288>`_,
  `4389 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4389>`_,
  `4397 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4397>`_.
* (HTTP client) This closes several known problems that were fixed in recent
  ``libcurl`` versions, including segfaults, hangs, memory leaks and performance
  problems.
* (LuaJIT) Fix overflow of snapshot map offset.
  Part of issue `4171 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4171>`_.
* (LuaJIT) Fix rechaining of pseudo-resurrected string keys.
  Part of issue `4171 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4171>`_.
* (LuaJIT) Fix fold machinery misbehaves.
  Issue `4376 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4376>`_.
* (LuaJIT) Fix for `debug.getinfo(1,'>S')`.
  Issue `3833 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3833>`_.
* (LuaJIT) Fix `string.find` recording.
  Issue `4476 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4476>`_.
* (LuaJIT) Fixed a segfault when unsinking 64-bit pointers.
* (Misc) Increase even more the open file limit in ``systemd`` unit file.
* (Misc) Raise error in ``tarantoolctl`` when ``box.cfg()`` isn't called.
  Issue `3953 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3953>`_.
* (Misc) Support ``systemd``’s NOTIFY_SOCKET on OS X.
  Issue `4436 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4436>`_.
* (Misc) Fix ``coio_getaddrinfo()`` when 0 timeout is passed
  (affects ``netbox``’s ``connect_timeout``).
  Issue `4209 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4209>`_.
* (Misc) Fix ``coio_do_copyfile()`` to perform truncate of destination
  (affects ``fio.copyfile()``).
  Issue `4181 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4181>`_.
* (Misc) Make hints in ``coio_getaddrinfo()`` optional.
* (Misc) Validate ``msgpack.decode()`` cdata size argument.
  Issue `4224 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4224>`_.
* (Misc) Fix linking with static ``openssl`` library.
  Issue `4437 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4437>`_.

Deprecations

* (Core) Deprecate ``rows_per_wal`` in favor of ``wal_max_size``.
  Part of issue `3762 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3762>`_.

.. _whats_new_1103:

**Release 1.10.3**

Release type: stable (lts). Release date: 2019-04-01.  Tag: 1-10-3.

Announcement: https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/releases/tag/1.10.3.

Overview

1.10.3 is the next :ref:`stable (lts) <release-policy>` release in the 1.10 series.
The label 'stable' means we have had systems running in production without known crashes,
bad results or other showstopper bugs for quite a while now.

This release resolves 69 issues since 1.10.2.

Compatibility

Tarantool 1.10.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.9.x in binary data layout, client-server protocol and replication protocol.
Please :ref:`upgrade <admin-upgrades>` using the ``box.schema.upgrade()`` procedure to unlock all the new features of the 1.10.x series when migrating from 1.9 version.

Functionality added or changed

* (Engines) Randomize vinyl index compaction
  Issue `3944 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3944>`_.
* (Engines) Throttle tx thread if compaction doesn't keep up with dumps
  Issue `3721 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3721>`_.
* (Engines) Do not apply run_count_per_level to the last level
  Issue `3657 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3657>`_.
* (Server) Report the number of active iproto connections
  Issue `3905 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3905>`_.
* (Replication) Never keep a dead replica around if running out of disk space
  Issue `3397 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3397>`_.
* (Replication) Report join progress to the replica log
  Issue `3165 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3165>`_.
* (Lua) Expose snapshot status in box.info.gc()
  Issue `3935 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3935>`_.
* (Lua) Show names of Lua functions in backtraces in fiber.info()
  Issue `3538 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3538>`_.
* (Lua) Check if transaction opened
  Issue `3518 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3518>`_.

Bugs fixed

* (Engines) Tarantool crashes if DML races with DDL
  Issue `3420 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3420>`_.
* (Engines) Recovery error if DDL is aborted
  Issue `4066 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4066>`_.
* (Engines) Tarantool could commit in the read-only mode
  Issue `4016 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4016>`_.
* (Engines) Vinyl iterator crashes if used throughout DDL
  Issue `4000 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4000>`_.
* (Engines) Vinyl doesn't exit until dump/compaction is complete
  Issue `3949 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3949>`_.
* (Engines) After re-creating secondary index no data is visible
  Issue `3903 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3903>`_.
* (Engines) box.info.memory().tx underflow
  Issue `3897 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3897>`_.
* (Engines) Vinyl stalls on intensive random insertion
  Issue `3603 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3603>`_.
* (Server) Newer version of libcurl explodes fiber stack
  Issue `3569 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3569>`_.
* (Server) SIGHUP crashes tarantool
  Issue `4063 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4063>`_.
* (Server) checkpoint_daemon.lua:49: bad argument #2 to 'format'
  Issue `4030 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4030>`_.
* (Server) fiber:name() show only part of name
  Issue `4011 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4011>`_.
* (Server) Second hot standby switch may fail
  Issue `3967 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3967>`_.
* (Server) Updating box.cfg.readahead doesn't affect existing connections
  Issue `3958 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3958>`_.
* (Server) fiber.join() blocks in 'suspended' if fiber has cancelled
  Issue `3948 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3948>`_.
* (Server) Tarantool can be crashed by sending gibberish to a binary socket
  Issue `3900 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3900>`_.
* (Server) Stored procedure to produce push-messages never breaks on client disconnect
  Issue `3859 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3559>`_.
* (Server) Tarantool crashed in lj_vm_return
  Issue `3840 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3840>`_.
* (Server) Fiber executing box.cfg() may process messages from iproto
  Issue `3779 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3779>`_.
* (Server) Possible regression on nosqlbench
  Issue `3747 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3747>`_.
* (Server) Assertion after improper index creation
  Issue `3744 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3744>`_.
* (Server) Tarantool crashes on vshard startup (lj_gc_step)
  Issue `3725 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3725>`_.
* (Server) Do not restart replication on box.cfg if the configuration didn't change
  Issue `3711 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3711>`_.
* (Replication) Applier times out too fast when reading large tuples
  Issue `4042 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4042>`_.
* (Replication) Vinyl replica join fails
  Issue `3968 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3968>`_.
* (Replication) Error during replication
  Issue `3910 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3910>`_.
* (Replication) Downstream status doesn't show up in replication.info unless the channel is broken
  Issue `3904 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3904>`_.
* (Replication) replication fails: tx checksum mismatch
  Issue `3993 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3883>`_.
* (Replication) Rebootstrap crashes if master has replica's rows
  Issue `3740 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3740>`_.
* (Replication) After restart tuples revert back to their old state which was before replica sync
  Issue `3722 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3722>`_.
* (Replication) Add vclock for safer hot standby switch
  Issue `3002 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3002>`_.
* (Replication) Master row is skipped forever in case of wal write failure
  Issue `2283 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/2283>`_.
* (Lua) space:frommap():tomap() conversion fail
  Issue `4045 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/4045>`_.
* (Lua) Non-informative message when trying to read a negative count of bytes from socket
  Issue `3979 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3979>`_.
* (Lua) space:frommap raise "tuple field does not match..." even for nullable field
  Issue `3883 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3883>`_.
* (Lua) Tarantool crashes on net.box.call after some uptime with vshard internal fiber
  Issue `3751 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3751>`_.
* (Lua) Heap use after free in lbox_error
  Issue `1955 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/1955>`_.
* (Misc) http.client doesn't honour 'connection: keep-alive'
  Issue `3955 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3955>`_.
* (Misc) net.box wait_connected is broken
  Issue `3856 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3856>`_.
* (Misc) Mac build fails on Mojave
  Issue `3797 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3797>`_.
* (Misc) FreeBSD build error: no SSL support
  Issue `3750 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3750>`_.
* (Misc) 'http.client' sets invalid (?) reason
  Issue `3681 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3681>`_.
* (Misc) Http client silently modifies headers when value is not a "string" or a "number"
  Issue `3679 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3679>`_.
* (Misc) yaml.encode uses multiline format for 'false' and 'true'
  Issue `3662 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3662>`_.
* (Misc) yaml.encode encodes 'null' incorrectly
  Issue `3583 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3583>`_.
* (Misc) Error object message is empty
  Issue `3604 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3604>`_.
* (Misc) Log can be flooded by warning messages
  Issue `2218 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/2218>`_.

Deprecations

* Deprecate ``console=true`` option for :ref:`net.box.new() <net_box-new>`.

.. _whats_new_1102:

**Release 1.10.2**

Release type: stable (lts). Release date: 2018-10-13.  Tag: 1-10-2.

Announcement: https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/releases/tag/1.10.2.

This is the first :ref:`stable (lts) <release-policy>` release in the 1.10
series.
Also, Tarantool 1.10.2 is a major release that deprecates Tarantool 1.9.2.
It resolves 95 issues since 1.9.2.

Tarantool 1.10.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.9.x in binary data
layout, client-server protocol and replication protocol.
You can :ref:`upgrade <admin-upgrades>` using the ``box.schema.upgrade()``
procedure.

The goal of this release is to significantly increase ``vinyl`` stability and
introduce automatic rebootstrap of a Tarantool replica set.

Functionality added or changed:

  * (Engines) support ALTER for non-empty vinyl spaces.
    Issue `1653 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/1653>`_.
  * (Engines) tuples stored in the vinyl cache are not shared among the indexes
    of the same space.
    Issue `3478 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3478>`_.
  * (Engines) keep a stack of UPSERTS in ``vy_read_iterator``.
    Issue `1833 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/1833>`_.
  * (Engines) ``box.ctl.reset_stat()``, a function to reset vinyl statistics.
    Issue `3198 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3198>`_.

  * (Server) :ref:`configurable syslog destination <cfg_logging-log>`.
    Issue `3487 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3487>`_.
  * (Server) allow different nullability in indexes and format.
    Issue `3430 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3430>`_.
  * (Server) allow to
    :ref:`back up any checkpoint <reference_lua-box_backup-backup_start>`,
    not just the last one.
    Issue `3410 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3410>`_.
  * (Server) a way to detect that a Tarantool process was
    started / restarted by ``tarantoolctl``
    (:ref:`TARANTOOLCTL and TARANTOOL_RESTARTED <tarantoolctl-instance_management>`
    env vars).
    Issues `3384 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3384>`_,
    `3215 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3215>`_.
  * (Server) :ref:`net_msg_max <cfg_networking-net_msg_max>`
    configuration parameter to restrict the number of allocated fibers.
    Issue `3320 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3320>`_.

  * (Replication)
    display the connection status if the downstream gets disconnected from
    the upstream
    (:ref:`box.info.replication.downstream.status <box_info_replication>`
    ``= disconnected``).
    Issue `3365 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3365>`_.
  * (Replication) :ref:`replica-local spaces <replication-local>`
    Issue `3443 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3443>`_.
  * (Replication)
    :ref:`replication_skip_conflict <cfg_replication-replication_skip_conflict>`,
    a new option in ``box.cfg{}`` to skip conflicting rows in replication.
    Issue `3270 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3270>`_.
  * (Replication)
    remove old snapshots which are not needed by replicas.
    Issue `3444 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3444>`_.
  * (Replication)
    log records which tried to commit twice.
    Issue `3105 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3105>`_.

  * (Lua) new function :ref:`fiber.join() <fiber_object-join>`.
    Issue `1397 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/1397>`_.
  * (Lua) new option ``names_only`` to :ref:`tuple:tomap() <box_tuple-tomap>`.
    Issue `3280 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3280>`_.
  * (Lua) support custom rock servers (``server`` and ``only-server``
    options for :ref:`tarantoolctl rocks <tarantoolctl-module_management>`
    command).
    Issue `2640 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/2640>`_.

  * (Lua) expose ``on_commit``/``on_rollback`` triggers to Lua;
    Issue `857 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/857>`_.
  * (Lua) new function :ref:`box.is_in_txn() <box-is_in_txn>`
    to check if a transaction is open;
    Issue `3518 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3518>`_.
  * (Lua) tuple field access via a json path
    (by :ref:`number <box_tuple-field_number>`,
    :ref:`name <box_tuple-field_name>`, and
    :ref:`path <box_tuple-field_path>`);
    Issue `1285 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/1285>`_.
  * (Lua) new function :ref:`space:frommap() <box_space-frommap>`;
    Issue `3282 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3282>`_.
  * (Lua) new module :ref:`utf8 <utf8-module>` that implements libicu's bindings
    for use in Lua;
    Issues `3290 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3290>`_,
    `3385 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/3385>`_.
