Tarantool 2.10.6
================

Released on 2023-03-22.

*   Release: :tarantool-release:`2.10.6`.
*   Tag: ``2.10.6``.

Overview
--------

2.10.6 is the 7th
:doc:`stable </release/policy/>` version of the 2.10 release series.
It resolves 3 bugs since 2.10.5.

The “stable” label means that we have all planned features implemented
and we see no high-impact issues. However, if you encounter an issue,
feel free to `report
it <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues>`__ on GitHub.

Compatibility
-------------

Tarantool 2.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.10.x in the binary
data layout, client-server protocol, and replication protocol.

Please :doc:`upgrade </book/admin/upgrades>` using the ``box.schema.upgrade()`` procedure to unlock all the new
features of the 2.x series.

Bugs fixed
----------

Core
~~~~

-  Fixed various bugs related to unsafe (i.e., coming from an unknown
   source) decoding and validating of MsgPack extensions (:tarantool-sec-issue:`73`).

LuaJIT
~~~~~~

Backported patches from the vanilla LuaJIT trunk (:tarantool-issue:`8069`).
The following issues were fixed as part of this activity:

-  Fixed successful ``math.min/math.max`` call with no args (:tarantool-issue:`6163`).
-  Fixed inconsistencies in ``math.min/math.max`` calls with a NaN arg
   (:tarantool-issue:`6163`).
-  Fixed ``pcall()`` call without arguments on arm64.
-  Fixed assembling of ``IR_{AHUV}LOAD`` specialized to boolean for
   aarch64.
-  Fixed constant rematerialization on arm64.

Box
~~~

-  Fixed a bug where ``box.cfg.force_recovery`` doesn’t work when there
   is no user spaces in a snapshot (:tarantool-issue:`7974`).
