Tarantool 2.10.8
================

Released on 2023-09-14.

*   Release: :tarantool-release:`2.10.8`.
*   Tag: ``2.10.8``.

Overview
--------

2.10.8 is the ninth
:doc:`stable </release/policy/>` version of the 2.10 release series.
It introduces 5 improvements and resolves 28 bugs since 2.10.7.

The “stable” label means that we have all planned features implemented
and we see no high-impact issues. However, if you encounter an issue,
feel free to `report
it <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues>`__ on GitHub.

Compatibility
-------------

Tarantool 2.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.10.x in the binary
data layout, client-server protocol, and replication protocol.

Please :doc:`upgrade </admin/upgrades>` using the ``box.schema.upgrade()`` procedure to unlock all the new
features of the 2.x series.

Functionality added or changed
------------------------------

Box
~~~

-  The maximum length of ``box.cfg{}`` string parameters is now 512
   instead of 256.

Test
~~~~

Fuzz
^^^^

-  LuaJIT now can be fuzzed using grammar-based fuzzer (:tarantool-issue:`4823`).

Build
~~~~~

-  Hardening against memory corruption attacks is now enabled by default
   on FreeBSD (:tarantool-issue:`7536`).
-  Added the CMake option ``FIBER_STACK_SIZE`` to set the default fiber
   stack size.
-  Updated libcurl to version 8.3.0.

Bugs fixed
----------

Core
~~~~

-  Fixed a bug when Tarantool failed to decode a request containing an
   unknown IPROTO key. The bug resulted in broken connectivity between
   Tarantool 2.10 and 2.11 (:tarantool-issue:`8745`).
-  Fixed a bug causing the ``ER_CURSOR_NO_TRANSACTION`` failure for
   transactions on synchronous spaces when the ``on_commit/on_rollback``
   triggers are set (:tarantool-issue:`8505`).
-  Fixed a bug causing the effective session and user are not propagated
   to ``box.on_commit`` and ``box.on_rollback`` trigger callbacks when
   transaction is synchronous (:tarantool-issue:`8742`).
-  Fixed a crash that could happen when Tarantool is started in the
   :ref:`background mode <cfg_basic-background>` (:tarantool-issue:`6128`).
-  Fixed a bug when MVCC sometimes lost gap record (:tarantool-issue:`8326`).
-  Fixed a bug when MVCC rollback of prepared statement could break
   internal invariants (:tarantool-issue:`8648`).
-  Now MVCC engine automatically aborts a transaction if it reads
   changes of a prepared transaction and this transaction is aborted
   (:tarantool-issue:`8654`).
-  Fixed a bug that caused writing incorrect values into the
   ``stream_id`` field of xlog headers (:tarantool-issue:`8783`).
-  Fixed a bug when a space that is referenced by a foreign key could
   not be truncated even if the referring space was empty (:tarantool-issue:`8946`).
-  Fixed a crash that could happen when Tarantool is compiled by
   ``clang`` version 15 and above with enabled AddressSanitizer
   (`tarantool/tarantool-qa#321 <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool-qa/issues/321>`_).
-  Fixed a use-after-free bug in iproto server code (:tarantool-issue:`9037`).
-  Fixed a heap-buffer-overflow bug in fiber creation code (:tarantool-issue:`9026`).

Memtx
~~~~~

-  Fixed a heap-use-after-free bug in the transaction manager, which
   could occur when performing a DDL operation concurrently with a
   transaction on the same space (:tarantool-issue:`8781`).

Vinyl
~~~~~

-  Fixed a heap-use-after-free bug in the Vinyl read iterator caused by
   a race between a disk read and a memory dump task. The bug could lead
   to a crash or an invalid query result (:tarantool-issue:`8852`).

Replication
~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Fixed a possible failure to promote the desired node by
   ``box.ctl.promote()`` on a cluster with nodes configured with
   ``election_mode = "candidate"`` (:tarantool-issue:`8497`).
-  Fixed nodes configured with ``election_mode = 'candidate'``
   spuriously detecting a split-vote when another candidate should win
   with exactly a quorum of votes for it (:tarantool-issue:`8698`).

LuaJIT
~~~~~~

Backported patches from the vanilla LuaJIT trunk (:tarantool-issue:`8516`, :tarantool-issue:`8825`).
The following issues were fixed as part of this activity:

-  Fixed canonicalization of +-0.0 keys for ``IR_NEWREF``.

-  Fixed result truncation for ``bit.rol`` on x86_64 platforms.

-  Fixed ``lua_yield()`` invocation inside C hooks.

-  Fixed memory chunk allocation beyond the memory limit.

-  Fixed TNEW load forwarding with instable types.

-  Fixed use-def analysis for ``BC_VARG``, ``BC_FUNCV``.

-  Fixed ``BC_UCLO`` insertion for returns.

-  Fixed recording of ``BC_VARG`` with unused vararg values.

-  Initialization instructions on trace are now emitted only for the
   first member of a union.

-  Prevent integer overflow while parsing long strings.

-  Fixed various ``^`` operator and ``math.pow()`` function
   inconsistencies.

-  Fixed parsing with predicting ``next()`` and ``pairs()``.

-  Fixed binary number literal parsing. Parsing of binary number with a
   zero fractional part raises error too now.

-  Fixed load forwarding optimization applied after table rehashing.

-  Fixed recording of the ``BC_TSETM``.

Lua
~~~

-  Fixed the xlog reader Lua module to show unknown row header fields.
   Before this change the xlog reader silently skipped them.

Netbox
^^^^^^

-  Fixed a heap-use-after-free bug in the function creating a tuple
   format Lua object for ``net.box`` (:tarantool-issue:`8889`).

.. _box-1:

Box
~~~

-  Fixed the memory leaks caused by the multi-statement transaction
   errors in the space index building and the space format checking
   operations (:tarantool-issue:`8773`).
-  Fixed a bug in the box console implementation because of which the
   ``language`` parameter was shared between connected clients
   (:tarantool-issue:`8817`).
-  Fixed an invalid memory access in a corner case of a specialized
   comparison function (:tarantool-issue:`8899`).

Console
~~~~~~~

-  Fixed console ignoring ``-i`` flag in case stdin is not a tty
   (:tarantool-issue:`5064`).

Datetime
~~~~~~~~

-  Fixed a bug raising a false positive error when creating new
   intervals with range boundary values (:tarantool-issue:`8878`).
-  Fixed a bug with buffer overflow in ``tnt_strptime`` (:tarantool-issue:`8502`).

Http
~~~~

-  Fixed a streaming connection stuck if etcd is stopped unexpectedly
   (:tarantool-issue:`9086`).

Msgpack
~~~~~~~

-  Fixed decoding datetime intervals with fields larger than possible
   int32 values (:tarantool-issue:`8887`).
