Tarantool 2.3.3
===============

Date: 2020-07-17 Tag: 2.3.3-1-g43af95e

Overview
--------

2.3.3 is the last stable version of the 2.3 release series. The label
stable means we have all planned features implemented and we see no
high-impact issues.

This release resolves roughly 26 issues since the latest stable version.
There may be bugs in less common areas, please feel free to file an
issue at `GitHub <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues>`__.

Please note, this release contains **no new features**.

Compatibility
-------------

Tarantool 2.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.10.x in binary
data layout, client-server protocol and replication protocol.

Please
`upgrade <https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/2.3/book/admin/upgrades/>`__
using the box.schema.upgrade() procedure to unlock all the new features
of the 2.x series.

Bugs fixed
----------

Core
~~~~

-   Fixed a bug in altering a normal index to a functional one (n/a).
-   Fixed a couple of internal symbols dangling in global namespace \_G
    (gh-4812).
-   Fixed bug when on_shutdown triggers weren’t executed after EOF
    (gh-4703).
-   Fixed a bug in C module reloading (gh-4945).
-   Fixed assert outdated due to multikey index arrival (gh-5132).
-   Fixed confusing implicit requirements for tuple fields (gh-5027).
-   Added needed key validation to space_before_replace (gh-5017).
-   Fixed check of index field map size which led to crash (gh-5084).
-   Fixed NULL pointer dereference when merger is called via the binary
    protocol (say, via net.box) (gh-4954).
-   Fixed crash when invalid JSON was used in update() (gh-5135).

Replication
~~~~~~~~~~~

-   Fixed possible ER_TUPLE_FOUND error when bootstrapping replicas in an
    1.10/2.1.1 cluster (gh-4924).
-   Fixed tx boundary check for half-applied txns (gh-5125).
-   Fixed replication tx boundaries after local space rework (gh-4928).

Lua
~~~

-   Fixed error while closing socket.tcp_server socket (gh-4087).

SQL
~~~

-   Fixed wrong order of rows as a result of query containing column of
    SCALAR type in ORDER BY clause (gh-4697).
-   Fixed bug with the display of collation for scalar fields in <SELECT>
    result, when ``sql_full_metadata`` is enabled (gh-4755).
-   Block using HASH indexes in SQL since scheduler is unable to use it
    properly (gh-4659).
-   Fixed races and corner cases in box (re)configuration (gh-4231).

Vinyl
~~~~~

-   Fixed crash during compaction due to tuples with size exceeding
    vinyl_max_tuple_size setting (gh-4864).
-   Fixed crash during recovery of vinyl index due to the lack of file
    descriptors (gh-4805).
-   Fixed crash during executing upsert changing primary key in debug
    mode (gh-5005).
-   Fixed crash due to triggered dump process during secondary index
    creation (gh-5042).
-   Fixed crash/deadlock (depending on build type) during dump process
    scheduling and concurrent DDL operation (gh-4821).
-   Fixed crash during read of prepared but still not yet not committed
    statement (gh-3395).
-   Fixed squashing set and arithmetic upsert operations (gh-5106).
-   Create missing folders for vinyl spaces and indexes if needed to
    avoid confusing fails of tarantool started from backup (gh-5090).
-   Fixed crash during squash of many (more than 4000) upserts modifying
    the same key (gh-4957).

Memtx
~~~~~

-   Fixed concurrent replaces on index building. Tuples are now
    referenced on all needed execution paths (gh-4973).
