# Tarantool 2.4.3

Release: {tarantool-release}`2.4.3`
Date: 2020-10-22 Tag: 2.4.3-1-g986fab7

## Overview

This release resolves roughly 13 issues since the 2.4.2 version. There
may be bugs in less common areas. If you find any, feel free to report
an issue at [GitHub](https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues).

## Compatibility

Tarantool 2.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.10.x in the binary
data layout, client-server protocol, and replication protocol.

Please
[upgrade](https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/book/admin/upgrades/)
using the `box.schema.upgrade()` procedure to unlock all the new
features of the 2.x series.

## Functionality added or changed

### Module API

- Exposed the box region, key_def and several other functions in order
  to implement external tuple.keydef and tuple.merger modules on top of
  them ({tarantool-issue}`5273`, {tarantool-issue}`5384`).

## Bugs fixed

### Core

- Fixed a crash when JSON tuple field access was used to get a multikey
  indexed field, and when a JSON contained \[\*\] in the beginning
  ({tarantool-issue}`5224`).
- Fixed msgpack extension types decoding error message ({tarantool-issue}`5016`).
- Dropped restrictions on nullable multikey index root. They were
  introduced due to inaccuracy in multikey index realization. It is now
  fixed. Also all fields are now nullable by default as it was before
  2.2.1 ({tarantool-issue}`5192`).
- Fixed fibers switch-over to prevent JIT machinery misbehavior. Trace
  recording is aborted when fiber yields the execution. The yield
  occurring while the compiled code is being run (it’s likely a
  function with a yield underneath called via LuaJIT FFI) leads to the
  platform panic ({tarantool-issue}`1700`, {tarantool-issue}`4491`).
- Fixed fibers switch-over to prevent implicit GC disabling. The yield
  occurring while user-defined \_\_gc metamethod is running leads to the
  platform panic.

### Replication

- Anonymous replica could be registered and could prevent WAL files
  removal ({tarantool-issue}`5287`).
- XlogGapError is not a critical error anymore. It means,
  box.info.replication will show upstream status as ‘loading’ if the
  error was found. The upstream will be restarted until the error is
  resolved automatically with a help of another instance, or until the
  replica is removed from box.cfg.replication ({tarantool-issue}`5287`).

### LuaJIT

- Fixed the error occurring on loading luajit-gdb.py with Python2
  ({tarantool-issue}`4828`).

### Lua

- Fixed unhandled Lua error that may lead to memory leaks and
  inconsistencies in `<space_object>:frommap()`,
  `<key_def_object>:compare()`, `<merge_source>:select()`
  ({tarantool-issue}`5382`).

### SQL

- SQL view are not alterable anymore. Beforehand it led to undefined
  behavior.

### Misc

- Fixed potential lag on boot up procedure when system’s password
  database is slow in access ({tarantool-issue}`5034`).

### Module API

- Get rid of typedef redefinitions for compatibility with C99
  ({tarantool-issue}`5313`).
