Tarantool 2.5.2
===============

Date: 2020-10-22 Tag: 2.5.2-1-gf63c43b

Overview
--------

This release resolves roughly 25 issues since the 2.5.2 version. There
may be bugs in less common areas. If you find any, feel free to report
an issue at `GitHub <https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues>`__.

Compatibility
-------------

Tarantool 2.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 1.10.x in the binary
data layout, client-server protocol, and replication protocol.

Please
`upgrade <https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/book/admin/upgrades/>`__
using the ``box.schema.upgrade()`` procedure to unlock all the new
features of the 2.x series.

Functionality added or changed
------------------------------

Core
~~~~

-   New function ``space:alter(options)`` to change some space settings
    without recreation nor touching ``_space`` space.
    :doc:`Read more. </reference/reference_lua/box_space/alter>`

Module API
~~~~~~~~~~

-   Exposed the box region, key_def and several other functions in order
    to implement external tuple.keydef and tuple.merger modules on top of
    them (gh-5273, gh-5384).

Bugs fixed
----------


Core
~~~~

-   Fixed a bug related to ignoring internal getaddrinfo errors on macOS
    in logger (gh-4138).
-   Fixed a crash when JSON tuple field access was used to get a multikey
    indexed field, and when a JSON contained [*] in the beginning
    (gh-5224).
-   Fixed msgpack extension types decoding error message (gh-5016).
-   Dropped restrictions on nullable multikey index root. They were
    introduced due to inaccuracy in multikey index realization. It is now
    fixed. Also all fields are now nullable by default as it was before
    2.2.1 (gh-5192).
-   Fixed fibers switch-over to prevent JIT machinery misbehavior. Trace
    recording is aborted when fiber yields the execution. The yield
    occurring while the compiled code is being run (it’s likely a
    function with a yield underneath called via LuaJIT FFI) leads to the
    platform panic (gh-1700, gh-4491).
-   Fixed fibers switch-over to prevent implicit GC disabling. The yield
    occurring while user-defined \__gc metamethod is running leads to the
    platform panic.

Replication
~~~~~~~~~~~

-   Fixed a bug when a rolled back synchronous transaction could become
    committed after restart (gh-5140).
-   Fixed crash in synchronous replication when master’s local WAL write
    fails (gh-5146).
-   Instance will terminate if a synchronous transaction confirmation or
    rollback fail. Before it was undefined behavior (gh-5159).
-   Snapshot could contain changes from a rolled back synchronous
    transaction (gh-5167).
-   Fixed a crash when synchronous transaction’s rollback and confirm
    could be written simultaneously for the same LSN (gh-5185).
-   Fixed a crash when replica cleared synchronous transaction queue,
    while it was not empty on master (gh-5195).
-   During recovery of synchronous changes from snapshot the instance
    could crash (gh-5288).
-   Having synchronous rows in the snapshot could make the instance hang
    on recovery (gh-5298).
-   Anonymous replica could be registered and could prevent WAL files
    removal (gh-5287).
-   XlogGapError is not a critical error anymore. It means,
    box.info.replication will show upstream status as ‘loading’ if the
    error was found. The upstream will be restarted until the error is
    resolved automatically with a help of another instance, or until the
    replica is removed from box.cfg.replication (gh-5287).

LuaJIT
~~~~~~

-   Fixed the error occurring on loading luajit-gdb.py with Python 2
    (gh-4828).

Lua
~~~

-   Fixed a bug related to ignoring internal getaddrinfo errors. Now they
    can be thrown out by Lua socket functions (gh-4138).
-   Fixed: import of table.clear() method (gh-5210). Affected versions:
    2.5.0-265-g3af79e70b (inclusive) to 2.5.1-52-ged9a156 (exclusive).
-   Fixed unhandled Lua error that may lead to memory leaks and
    inconsistencies in ``<space_object>:frommap()``,
    ``<key_def_object>:compare()``, ``<merge_source>:select()``
    (gh-5382).

SQL
~~~

-   SQL view are not alterable anymore. Beforehand it led to undefined
    behavior.

Misc
~~~~

-   Fixed potential lag on boot up procedure when system’s password
    database is slow in access (gh-5034).


Module API
~~~~~~~~~~

-   Get rid of typedef redefinitions for compatibility with C99
    (gh-5313).
