..  _admin-upgrades-1.6-1.10:

Live upgrade from Tarantool 1.6 to 1.10
=======================================

This page includes explanations and solutions to some common issues
when upgrading a replica set from Tarantool 1.6 to 1.10.

..  include:: ../_includes/1.6-to-2.x-condition.rst

The procedure of live upgrade from 1.6 to 1.10 is similar to the general upgrade procedure,
which is as follows:

..  include:: ../_includes/upgrade_procedure.rst

7.  Run :ref:`box.schema.upgrade() <box_schema-upgrade>` on the new master.
    This will update the Tarantool system spaces to match the currently installed version of Tarantool.
    There is no need  to run ``box.schema.upgrade()`` on every node:
    changes are propagated to other nodes via the regular replication mechanism.

..  _admin-upgrades-1.6-1.10-step_8:

8.  Run ``box.snapshot()`` on every node in the replica set
    to make sure that the replicas immediately see the upgraded database state in case of restart.

What's different when upgrading from Tarantool 1.6:

**Step 2:** Tarantool 1.10+ fails to recover from 1.6 xlogs, unless ``box.cfg{force_recovery = true}`` is set.
There is some small difference between 1.6 and 1.10 xlogs, which makes 1.6 xlogs appear erroneous to 1.10+ instances.
In order to work around this, start the instance in ``force_recovery`` mode. To do so, add the line
``force_recovery = true`` to the file where the instance is initialized -- for example, to ``init.lua``.

**Step 3:** New Tarantool nodes follow 1.6 nodes just fine,
but some 1.6 nodes might disconnect from new nodes with an ER_LOADING error.
This is not critical, the error goes away when replication on 1.6 is restarted:

..  code-block:: lua

    old_repl = box.cfg.replication
    box.cfg{replication = ""}
    box.cfg{replication = old_repl}

**Step 7:** There was a breaking change between 1.6 and 1.10 --
in 1.6, the field type ``num`` was an alias to ``number``, and in 1.10, ``num`` is converted to ``unsigned``.
This means that after ``box.schema.upgrade()`` is performed on the master,
the user might have some spaces with ``unsigned`` fields containing non-unsigned values:
``double``, ``int``, and so on.
This will make the snapshot inconsistent, unless an extra action is performed after ``box.schema.upgrade()``.
Run this code in the Tarantool console on the new master:

..  code-block:: lua

    -- First find all spaces containing unsigned fields with non-unsigned values in them.
    -- Say, we have one such space denoted problematic_space and the problem is in field problematic_field_no.
    a = box.space.problematic_space:format()
    a[problematic_field_no].type = 'number'
    box.space.problematic_space:format(a)

Once this is performed on the master, it's safe to proceed to
:ref:`step 8 <admin-upgrades-1.6-1.10-step_8>`, making a snapshot on every node.

**Step 8:** The user might be concerned with snapshot size in 1.10 --
it's drastically smaller than the one created by 1.6 (for example, ~300 Mb vs. 6 Gb in some corner cases).
There is nothing to worry about.
Tarantool 1.6 didn't compress snapshots, while Tarantool 1.10 and above does that.
