..  _admin-upgrades-2.8.1_mixed_transactions:

Recover from WALs with mixed transactions when upgrading to 2.11.0
==================================================================

This is a guide on fixing a specific problem that could happen when upgrading
from a Tarantool version between 2.1.2 and 2.2.0 to 2.8.1 or later. The described
solution is applicable since version 2.11.0.

The problem is described in the issue :tarantool-issue:`7932`. If two or more
transactions happened simultaneously in Tarantool 2.1.2-2.2.0, their operations
could be written to the write-ahead log mixed with each other. Starting from version
2.8.1, Tarantool recovers transactions atomically and expects all WAL entries
between a transaction's ``begin`` and ``commit`` operations to belong to one transaction.
If there is an operation belonging to another transaction, Tarantool fails to recover
from such a WAL.

Starting from version :doc:`2.11.0 </release/2.11.0>`, Tarantool can recover from
WALs with mixed transactions in the ``force_recovery`` mode.

Instances fail to start
-----------------------

If all instances or some of them fail to start after upgrading to 2.11 due to
a recovery error:

1.  Start these instances with the :ref:`force_recovery <cfg_binary_logging_snapshots-force_recovery>`
    option to ``true``.
2.  Make new snapshots on the instances, so that the old snapshots aren't used
    for recovery anymore.
3.  Set ``force_recovery`` back to ``false``.

Replication doesn't work
------------------------

After all the instances start successfully, WALs with mixed transactions
may still lead to replication issues. Some instances may fail to replicate from other
instances because they are sending incorrect WALs. To fix the replication issues,
rebootstrap the instances that fail to replicate.